---
title: Java OpenID Library - Target Audience
date: '2009-12-24T12:02:48-08:00'
shortlink: [/b/Ev, /p/895]
categories:
- identity
- technology
tags:
- shibboleth
- java
- openid
---
One of the decisions that has to be made, or at least considered, early in the design of any software project is
identifying your target audience.  This is especially true of libraries that are designed to be integrated into other
applications.  Who do you expect to be using this library, and how do you expect them to make use of it?  Is it
something like [log4j][] that can be dropped into place and used with just a few lines of additional code?  Or is it
something that is intended to be integrated into a larger system, requiring the developer using the library to provide
additional logic and business rules to get things working?  Something that might require a non-trivial amount of effort,
depending on the needs of the use-case.  There is no right or wrong answer, and oftentimes it's somewhere in between,
but it's something that must be considered.

Some of the best software libraries I've used address both ends of the spectrum.  There's a common adage in software
development (and I'm sure it goes back farther than that): "make the common things easy, and the hard things possible".
First, you don't want to make things any harder than necessary for the majority of users that are just using the basic
functionality of a library.  If they don't care about customizing and tweaking every little aspect of it, then the way
they interact with the library should be relatively simple and straightforward.  But for those users that have unique
needs, the library should allow them to configure it in such a way to accommodate that.  It is certainly my goal to
address both extremes in the Shibboleth OpenID library, but it will happen in phases.

The first phase will address the edge-cases, those users of the library that tend to have unique needs and requirements.
That may seem backwards, but I assure you it isn't.  First of all, the really practical reason for starting here is that
Shibboleth is itself an edge case.  The reason I chose not to use the existing Java OpenID libraries in the first place
was that they didn't adequately conform to the way Shibboleth needed them to work.  But from a design perspective, I've
found that this approach tends to yield better results anyway.

[log4j]: http://logging.apache.org/log4j/


## Small Pieces Loosely Coupled ##

I've learned that in order to make a system really flexible and modular, it's best to architect it that way from the
very beginning.  You have to decide where the logical divisions of labor are within the system, and then translate that
into the code itself.  Each component should be relatively self-contained, it's purpose should be clear, and its
interface (the way it interacts with other components) should be separated from its actual implementation.  Sometimes
these components are obvious, and there are clear places where the code should be divided.  But more often than not, its
a judgement call.  Architecture is often harder than actual construction, whether you're talking about software or brick
and mortar.  It requires a lot of creativity because you're often working from a blank canvas, but it also requires that
your plans are grounded in what is actually possible.  Architectural plans are worthless if they can't actually be
implemented in the real world in a practical way.  By no means do I think that I've found the best architecture for this
library, because it's always subjective.  Fortunately, I've had [similar libraries][] that I've borrowed from heavily
for inspiration, as well as much smarter developers that I work with to bounce ideas off of.

At its core, this library is an OpenID messaging library.  It is capable of converting between generic HTTP messages and
strongly typed OpenID objects that developers can work with.  My last two posts have talked about this in detail.  The
library also provides the additional logic for implementing the OpenID specification, things like Diffie Hellman key
exchange and OpenID message signing.  What the library does **not** do is tell you how you must compose these pieces
into a working system.  That's because there isn't just one way to do it.  It greatly depends on the application that is
wanting to add OpenID support.  If you're using a Java framework like [Tapestry][] or [JSF][], perhaps you have other
processing that happens to the message before the OpenID library gets involved.  How does the user get authenticated and
where do the user attributes come from?  I have no idea... that's up to your application to decide.  At this level, the
library makes no assumptions (or at least as few as possible) about how all of these small pieces should be coupled
together.

If this sounds like a lot of work left up to the user just for something as simple as OpenID, you're right... it is a
lot of work.  But when you really need that level of control, it's important that the library support that.

[similar libraries]: http://opensaml.org/
[Tapestry]: http://tapestry.apache.org/
[JSF]: http://java.sun.com/javaee/javaserverfaces/


## Addressing the Common Case ##

So what about everyone else, all the "mere mortals" who *don't* need that much control, and just want to add OpenID
support to some application using the default configuration?  At a high level, I'd love to have a Servlet Filter that
you can drop in front of your application, configure a few small things, and have it **just work** as an OpenID relying
party.  I've always been a huge fan of the Tapestry framework, so I'd love to have a Tapestry component that can be
dropped in just as easily.  All of these things are possible by building a layer that sits on top of those individual
components in the library, and arranges them in a prescribed way.  

Now, I don't anticipate that a drop-in Servlet Filter will ever be a part of the core library, because I don't think it
belongs there.  It would be a separate deliverable unto itself that simply relies on the library to do all of OpenID
work.  This also means that the Filter wouldn't necessarily need to come from me, anyone could write it and make it
available.  I don't imagine that the core library itself will ever have everything that the "common case" users will
need.  And I'm okay with that, because I'm not building an OpenID product, I'm building an OpenID library.


## Current Status ##

This is by no means a complete picture of the Shibboleth OpenID library, but it should give you a rough idea.  It
identifies some of the larger components of the libraries, and some of the interdependencies.  

<figure class="aligncenter">
  <img alt="Diagram showing library components" src="openid-library.png">
</figure>

The orange blocks are pieces that are basically complete and present in the current library.  All of the message
handling is complete for OpenID 2.0 message, as well as three of the most popular message extensions (SReg, AX, and
PAPE).  Additionally, association management is done, and a very simple AssociationStore is provided (though it needs a
little improvement).  The security layer is complete insofar as signing and verifying signed messages.  The yellow
blocks represent pieces that are not yet complete, but will be included in the core library in the future.  The
discovery component is still up in the air a little bit because it's not completely clear if we'll be using XRD, XRDS,
or both.  The portions of the security layer that depend on discovery are, of course, waiting on the completion of the
discovery stack.  Those pieces include everything that an application would need to construct an OpenID provider or
relying party.  They implement the full OpenID protocol.

But those components alone leave a lot to be filled in by the application using the library.  It says nothing about how
an incoming HttpServletRequest object is converted into an OpenID Message.  The application would be responsible for
instantiating the specific objects and wiring them together to actually get a working AssociationManager.  And for
applications that wish to have control over these specific aspects of an OpenID flow, this is a good thing.  The next
layer up on the stack however, the yellow "Managers" block, will provide simple Manager objects that wire things
together in a prescribed way.  Most users of the library will deal with the Manager layer, and probably nothing else.
Only when they have specific needs will it be necessary to dig any deeper.

Now this last layer is actually nothing special... it's a very common pattern, and both [OpenID4Java][] and [Joid][]
work in very similar ways.  I point it out only to note that while this layer will be part of the core library in a
future release, it isn't right now.  Much of the code that will likely make up these components has already been
written, but in the form of the [Shibboleth IdP extension][].  For the last few months I've been simultaneously building
both a generic OpenID library, as well as an actual product that makes use of the library.   One of the tougher ongoing
challenges while doing this is in deciding which of the two projects a particular bit of code goes into.  Much of the
time it's clear, but when in doubt, I'll put something into the Shibboleth extension rather than the library.  If
anything, I want to err on the side of keeping the library "pure" so to speak.  To not accidentally bake any assumptions
into the library itself that might limit its flexibility.  One of my focuses after the holidays will be in identifying
which pieces need to be refactored from the Shibboleth extension back into the core library in order to build out that
management layer.

(And in case it's not clear, the final layer in grey in the stack above are other pieces that will make use of the
OpenID library, but will likely not be part of the library itself.)

[OpenID4Java]: http://openid4java.org/
[Joid]: http://code.google.com/p/joid/
[Shibboleth IdP Extension]: https://wiki.shibboleth.net/confluence/display/SHIB2/IdP+OpenID
