---
title: This is not the Will Norris you're looking for
---

Hi, I'm [Will Norris](/). If I directed you to this page, then you may also be named Will Norris.
Or perhaps you were trying to get in touch with a friend or relative or client of yours named Will
Norris. Or maybe Bill Norris. Or perhaps Wayne or Ward or Walter Norris. But alas, you've reached
the wrong Will Norris.

I'm in my early forties. I work on security software at Tailscale. I'm married to [my lovely
wife](http://notsoserendipitous.com/). We live in Temecula, California.

I am _not_ a [bartender in Austin, Texas](https://twitter.com/wnorris3). I am _not_ a lawyer in Los
Angeles. I'm neither remodeling nor selling my home, and I'm _not_ dating middle aged women in New
Hampshire. I didn't order a replacement power cord for my HP printer, nor did I have my Chevy Tahoe
serviced at a Sears outside Orlando, Florida.

But it's okay. Maybe you just typoed the email address. Or perhaps you were given the wrong email
address by someone else. I'm not upset; it's not a big deal; I really do understand.

But I did want to bring it to your attention because the situation could be a tad more serious. I've
received a disturbingly large number of legal documents from lawyers that were not intended for me.
I _really_, _really_ don't want them. I've also received a surprisingly high number of (seemingly
legitimate) welcome emails from various services I never signed up for. I can only guess that
someone mistakenly thinks that _my_ email address is actually _their_ email address. So they may
not be getting the email they were expecting and not understand why.

**So here it is.** I have the email address *wnorris@gmail.com* (it's not the one I use primarily,
but I have it). You do not. Nor do you have the email address *w.norris@gmail.com*. That one is
me too. Really. You see, Gmail ignores the dots in the first part of the email address, so
"wnorris" is the same as "w.norris", which is the same as "w.n.o.r.r.i.s".

There are a lot of people named Will Norris in the world, so it's inevitable that confusion will
arise from time to time. So you might want to double check with that client of yours to find out
their correct email address, or even double check your own email address to make sure you have it
right.

Yours truly,<br>
Will Norris (no, not that one... the other one)
