---
title: ~/.bashrc
wordpress_id: 15
date: '2005-03-14T09:11:07-08:00'
categories:
- technology
tags:
- bash
---
It's taken me a while, but I think I've finally got my bashrc files to a setup I'm pretty happy with. I've provided it
here in hopes that others might find it useful...

The main thing I was trying to accomplish here  was to have a single set of files that I could use on all the machines I
work on.  This becomes more complicated considering what I use... my personal machine is MacOS X, this website is hosted
on Linux, and my primary development machine at UofM is SunOS.  Additionally, there are certain settings I want on all
Visible School machines (regardless of OS or hostname) but no others.  Additionally, I like to have a minimalistic
terminal prompt, so I use color to know what host I'm connected to.  What I ended up with is this
[`~/.bashrc`](https://github.com/willnorris/dotfiles/blob/master/bash/.bashrc)

This file is basically a launchpad for all of my other files, so let me explain how this all works line by line...

    HOST=`hostname | sed "s/\..*$//"`
    DOMAIN=`hostname | sed "s/^[^\.]*//" | sed "s/^\.//"`

First, I need to know the hostname and the domain of the machine I'm presently using.  I've found the above one-liners
to work on every operating system I've tested so far.

    [ -f /etc/bashrc ] && [ -r /etc/bashrc ] && source /etc/bashrc

If the machine has a system-wide bashrc that is readable, go ahead and execute that.  This is where a system
administrator may setup PATHs specific to this machine.

    [ -f ~/.bash/all ] && [ -r ~/.bash/all ] && source ~/.bash/all

[`~/.bash/all.pre.login`](https://github.com/willnorris/dotfiles/blob/master/bash/.bash/all.pre.login) contains things
that should be used by all machines...  things like my name, default editor, various aliases, etc, as well as a custom
function to setup my prompt

<!--
It first checks for a system-wide bashrc, then calls my
[`~/.bash/all.pre.login`][~/.bash/all.pre.login], and then runs appropriate bash scripts based on
the [operating system][~/.bash/os], the [network][~/.bash/network] it is a
part of, and its [hostname][~/.bash/host].  So long as you are careful to put
things in the appropriate file, everything begins to disappear into the
background and you don't have to think about your bash environment.
-->
